Chapter 2: Political Parties

5. What is a political party?
People having similar political ideologies, objectives, and programs may organize themselves into political parties. Political parties are different in nature from other economic and social organizations. Following are the special aspects of a political party:
a. A political party possesses its own distinct ideology and all members are committed to it.
b. The objective of a political party is to secure the people's support by submitting its policy and program to the public.
c. A political party aims to form the government by winning elections and executing its policy and program.
d. A political party aims to institutionalize the will and aspirations of the people by making and executing laws.

If a political party fails to get a majority, it can strengthen the government by forming an organized and active opposition. In short, a political party is a group of persons bound by common thoughts and programs that pursues government positions through elections.

6. What roles are political parties expected to play in a multiparty democracy?
In a multiparty democracy, the government is accountable to the people. The main method of making the government responsible to the people is through elections. To decide which party to select, it is necessary for people to remain informed about the policies and programs of the various political parties. People examine their alternatives before voting. Therefore, each political party must present its policies, programs and past record, to the public. Multiparty democracy is based on competition of thoughts, ideas and people's participation. Political parties help to institutionalize and convert social thought into political programs. Political parties, situated between the government and the people, must work as a shuttle, or vehicle, delivering the concerns of the people to the government, and the concerns of the government to the people.

Thus, a political party, after forming the government, fulfills its responsibilities by converting the promises made to the people during the election into government programs and laws. When a political party is not able to form the government, it plays the role of an opposition party, taking interest in each and every government policy and decision. An opposition party, upon finding any kind of irregularity, corruption, or anti-people policy, pressures the government with reform efforts.

A political party must use various means to truly represent the people's will and aspirations. The function of a political party is to study and discuss social, economic, and other problems and formulate solutions. The people expect solutions to their problems from the government and want political party initiatives to bring about a responsive government. Every political party is responsible for every issue of public concern and importance. A political party that fails to present clear concepts about these issues and that cannot give convincing answers to the citizenry will have a difficult time winning the hearts of the people.

7. What role do the political parties play in preserving free and fair elections?
A political party must play the following role to preserve fair elections:
a. A political party must train its workers on the election code of conduct and encourage them to follow it.
b. Political parties must give special training to its polling station representatives.
c. A political party or its activists should not be involved in getting votes through fear, threat, intimidation, coercion, force or temptation.
d. A political party must extend cooperation to personnel charged with holding impartial elections.
e. A political party can follow the voting program by appointing an observation team for Election Day.

8. Must a political party be registered to contest elections?
It is essential for a political party to register itself with the Election Commission. A political party registered with the Election Commission may fall into one of two categories: a) recognized or b) unrecognized. For a political party to be recognized as a national party, it must run a minimum of five percent women candidates and obtain three percent of the total vote in the general elections.