Chapter 12: Election Crimes and Punishments

86. What are election crimes?
Anything detrimental to free, fair, and impartial elections, and criminal and irresponsible activities in relation to elections, are known as election crimes. These activities are prohibited by law, and punishments have been established for those violating these laws.

87. What kinds of activities or actions are considered to be election crimes?
The following acts are considered to be election crimes according to Chapter 2 of the Election Crimes and Punishment Act of 1990:
a. To obtain a ballot and cast a vote in another’s name.
b. To influence others through fear, terror or intimidation.
c. To indulge in character assassination of a candidate or his family members with an intention to influence the election or to influence voters.
d. To campaign in a manner affecting the independence, sovereignty, and integrity of the nation, or to engage in publicity based on religion, caste, creed, language, or regionalism leading to communal disharmony.
e. To offer any cash, goods, or gifts in exchange for votes.
f. Any person assigned to the election, a security official, or an observer appointed by the Election Commission shall not take actions designed to make a candidate successful or unsuccessful.
g. To obstruct election personnel on Election Day or to create a disturbance of any kind around the polling stations.
h. To carry or use explosives, arms or ammunition around polling stations.
i. To damage, lose, or tear election notices or other related documents.
j. To delete, deface, correct, forge, damage, or tear ballots.
k. To hand over one’s ballot to others or to drop things other than a ballot into the ballot box.
l. To seize, loot, steal, tear, damage, or spoil any documents relating to elections.
m. To carry materials or documents outside the polling station without the permission of an election officer.
n. To cause obstruction of any kind to election personnel.
o. To delete, tear, damage, spoil, or misuse your voter’s identity card, or to give others your identity card for them to use.
p. To violate the election code of conduct.
q. To take a ballot from an election officer or from another voter in order to cast a vote unlawfully.
r. To fail to print the name of the printing press, political organization or the party or candidate's name on published pamphlets, posters, stickers etc.
s. To paste campaign materials or write campaign slogans on religious, archeological or historical monuments.
t. To undertake electioneering within 48 hours before Election Day.
u. To obstruct vote counting or other matters relating to elections.
v. To violate the secrecy of another’s vote.
w. To fail to submit the expenditures incurred in the election, as required of candidates.

88. What is the legal provision for punishing a person who commits an election crime?
According to the nature and severity of the offense, a fine of 1000 rupees or a sentence of three months imprisonment or both may be imposed, or a fine of 2000 rupees or a sentence of two years imprisonment or both may be imposed, in accordance with Chapter 3 of the Election Crimes and Punishment Act 1990. Likewise, any person sentenced to imprisonment under this Act shall not be eligible to be a candidate in elections until six years after the completion of the term of imprisonment.

89. How to file an election crime case? Who is entitled to file the charges?
An investigating officer appointed by the Election Commission to investigate election related offenses shall file the case in the election court no later than 90 days after the investigation is complete.
