Chapter 8: Polling Stations and Voting

55. What is a polling station?
A polling station is a place for voters to come and vote at a given time.
The Election Commission fixes the locations of polling stations on the basis of the number of voters and geographical situation. Generally, the Election Commission designates public buildings or public places as polling stations.

56. How do we know which places have been designated as polling stations?
The election office publishes a list of polling stations for the concerned election constituency. One can a municipality or village development committee office for information. Likewise, one can get information about the polling stations from the concerned district offices where district election offices exists or from election personnel within the Village Development Committee or municipality.

57. Where and when should one go to vote?
A voter must go to a polling station on the date and time published by the Election Commission. It is essential to obtain information about a polling station before Election Day. Voters can find out about the location of polling stations from their ward office, district election office or election personnel in a Village Development Committee or municipality.

58. Who is entitled to enter the polling station?
Only the following persons are entitled to enter the polling station:
a. Voters (with an identity card in a constituency where identity cards are required).
b. Candidate or his/her election representative or voting representative.
c. The Election Commission, election officer or election personnel.
d. A person given permission by an election officer to accompany a voter with a physical disability.

59. How to cast a vote in a polling station?
People can vote by going to the polling station and following these procedures:
a. One has to reach the polling station during the time set for voting. It is necessary to carry an identity card in constituencies where identity cards are required.
b. There may be more than one ward voting at your polling station; you must stand in the line designated for voters of your ward.
c. In order to vote, a person should provide their serial number from the voter’s list, their name, and their ward number to the election officer before casting their vote. In constituencies where identity cards are required, voters must produce an identity card in order to vote.
d. One should inspect the ballot to make sure that the signature of the an election official appears on the ballot.
e. One must then go to a secret room and stamp their ballot and then drop it into the ballot box.

60. What arrangements are made for voters unable to cast their own vote due to a disability?
If requested, the election officer shall assist a voter unable to cast their own vote due to sickness, old age, or physical infirmity such as blindness, or absence of eyesight or hands. The election officer shall mark the ballot according to the expressed will of the voter.

61. What is the provision for voter fraud by impersonation?
The candidate, or his or her election representative or voting representative (agent), shall file a petition of complaint with the polling officer by depositing 10 rupees (fee set by the Election Commission) against any person obtaining a ballot in the name of another person by disguising his or her real name. In the case of such a petition, the polling officer shall collect relevant evidence and make a decision immediately. The deposit shall not be returned if a valid complaint is not established. The deposit shall be returned to the concerned person if the complaint is valid.

62. What is “tendered” voting? How does one use this method of voting?
Tendered voting is as follows:
a. A person claiming to be a registered voter can lodge a complaint in writing with the polling officer if it appears some other person has taken his/her ballot and already voted.
b. The polling officer, in order to verify if the claim is valid or not, shall obtain originals of documents (the complainant’s identity card, citizenship certificate, etc.) and other evidence relating to the voter’s identity.
c. The polling officer shall decide from the evidence submitted whether the complainant is the real voter. Then the polling officer must indicate on a form given to the voter and on the left side of the record book that the ballot is “tendered.” Following that, the voter must be given a ballot.
d. When a “tendered” ballot is used, the ballot shall not be inserted into the ballot box but shall be placed in a separate envelope.

63. When is a polling station considered to be “captured”?
a. If anyone, by using force or coercion or threat, takes control of the polling station.
b. If anyone takes possession of the voting room.
c. If anyone attempts to influence the act of voting, or allows only voters supporting a particular candidate to vote, or prevents other voters from voting.
d. If anyone, with or without the use of force, prevents voters from going to the polling station(s).
e. If anyone prevents election personnel from discharging their duties.
f. If anyone snatches or damages the ballots, ballot boxes, or materials related to polling which are in the polling officer’s custody.

64. What is done after the expiration of the allotted voting time?
After voting time has expired, no one is allowed to vote in a polling station. Voters already standing in line when the period allotted for voting ends, are entitled to vote. After the expiration of voting time, the polling officer shall seal the ballot box by signing his/her name and shall submit the ballot boxes along with the receipts of used ballots and all of the unused ballots in different envelopes, along with any other election materials. The candidate or his/her appointed representatives, if they wish, may go along with the polling officer to the concerned office, but they are not allowed to hold or touch the ballot boxes.

65. How are the ballot boxes protected after the time allotted for voting has expired?
The following processes have been developed to safeguard the ballot boxes after the completion of voting:
a. The polling officer shall submit all election materials to the election officer's office, keeping them all in his/her possession at all times until submitted.
b. While processing the ballot boxes, proper coordination and cooperation must be made with security personnel.
c. If the polling officer must stop somewhere while carrying the ballot boxes, priority must be given to the security of the ballot boxes.
d. If election officials have to spend a night somewhere while carrying the ballot boxes to the center, they must inform the election office or the mobile team.
