Chapter 1: Democracy

1. What is democracy?
Democracy is a system of governance by the people and for the people. In any country, it is impossible for all people to participate directly in governance, so the people elect and send trusted men and women to represent them.

In a democracy, the government is responsible to the people. The government must work according to the will and aspirations of the citizenry. If the people’s representative government is not able to satisfy the aspirations of the people, then the public will not reelect them in the next election, and another set of representatives will be chosen to run the government.

In a democracy, the public is the master/sovereign of the government. In order to make the government responsive to the people, periodic elections and freedom of expression are essential.

2. What is a multiparty system?
Multiparty democracy is a system in which various political parties, having different ideologies, take part in an election and participate in running the government. In this system, different political parties put forward their policy and program and try to win the hearts of the people. In a multiparty democracy, there is a competition of ideas. Periodic elections and freedom of expression are important components of this system. During general elections, more emphasis is given to a party than to individual competition. In every general election, different political parties promote their candidates along with their party's policy and program. Therefore, when choosing how to vote, we must pay attention to each political party's program, its past activities and the reliability of the candidate it selects. Anyone who has become a candidate of a political party is accountable for his/her party's activities, and likewise, the party is accountable for the activities of its candidate.

3. What kind of democracy exists in Nepal and how do citizens participate in governance?
The Constitution of the Kingdom of Nepal 1990 established parliamentary democracy. There are two houses of parliament. The Upper House is called the National Assembly and the Lower House is called the House of Representatives. Elections to choose the 205 members of the House of Representatives are called general elections. Ordinarily, there is a general election every five years. However, general elections can be held earlier if the House of Representatives is dissolved before the expiration of its term. In a general election, different political parties put forward their policies and programs by fielding their respective candidates and try to win the hearts and votes of the people. The party that gets a majority, by winning a minimum of 103 seats in the House of Representatives, forms the government. If none of the political parties obtain a clear majority then there will be attempts to form a coalition government. If a coalition government cannot be formed, then the party with the largest number of seats will form a minority government. A minority government must win a vote of confidence from the House of Representatives within 30 days after formation. If the minority government fails to win a vote of confidence, then midterm elections are called.

The Constitution of the Kingdom of Nepal 1990 was written following a massive people’s movement. It established a parliamentary system of government based on multiparty democracy. The constitution has conferred sovereign rights on the people. Now it is the responsibility of the Nepalese people to understand this system. Everyone, whether rich or poor, literate or illiterate, female or male, and from whatever caste, tribe or occupation, has an equal right to participate in the governance of the country. Each citizen can do the following to participate in the Nepalese system of government:
a. Vote to select their representative.
b. Run as a candidate in the general election.
c. Assist the government with advice and suggestions.
d. Comment, criticize and peacefully demonstrate on any issue or activity of government with which they disagree.

4. What roles are citizens expected to play in their democracy?
In a democratic system, the public is the master of the government. It is the duty of each and every citizen to take an interest in what the government is doing. If citizens are not aware of the activities of the government, then citizens will not make proper use of their right to vote. Our vote must be used to select the right representatives and the right party to run the government. We can get to know the activities of the government through radio, newspapers, magazines, television and other media. The constitution gives each citizen the right to information. Therefore, every Nepali citizen must remain aware of the activities of elected government, and during the general election, properly utilize his or her right to vote. Each Nepali, in order to be a responsible citizen, must inquire about the government's activities and comment and criticize. We must use these rights given to us by our constitution.