Chapter 3: Election

9. What is an election?
An election is where voters select their government representatives. In a democratic government, periodic elections are mandatory. Through elections, mandates are given to the government, government activities are evaluated, and people's representatives are selected. Elections are the foundation for making democracies active and vibrant. The election system dictates such matters as setting the date of the election, preparing the voters' list, conducting the election, counting the votes and settling election disputes. In the election system, processes like voting, vote counting and declaring elected candidates are very important. Under Nepal’s system, as in the United Kingdom, the person securing the highest number of votes (first past the post) in elections to the House of Representatives and to local government, is declared the winner. In such an election system, voters vote only in favor their choices. Thus, a person who succeeds in getting the highest number of votes is declared elected. This system is very simple.

10. What are general elections?
According to the Constitution of the Kingdom of Nepal 1990, there is a provision for electing 205 members to the House of Representatives. Nationwide elections held for the 205 members of the House of Representatives are called general elections. Elections can take place in more than one phase. The Election Commission decides whether to hold general elections all at once or in phases.

11. What are midterm elections?
General elections ordinarily take place once every five years. This is known as a periodic election. However, a midterm election can be declared if the House of Representatives is dissolved before the expiration of its term for any reason. Elections held under such conditions are called midterm elections. The tenure of members elected under the midterm election is five years.

12. What are by-elections?
If a vacancy is created by a member before the completion of his/her term, by-elections are held to fill the seat for the remainder of the term.

13. How are members elected to the National Assembly?
The Upper House of Parliament is called the National Assembly. The National Assembly is a permanent house. There are 60 seats in the National Assembly. His Majesty nominates 10 members. The remaining 50 members are elected by indirect election. Of these 50 members, the House of Representatives elects 35, which must include at least three women. This election is conducted on a single, transferable, proportionate method of voting. The remaining 15 are elected from an electorate comprised of representatives of local bodies. The term for a member of the National Assembly is six years. One third of the total members are vacated every two years.

14. How are elections for local bodies held?
Local government bodies include the Village Development Committees (VDC), Municipalities, and District Development Committees (DDC). Local bodies at different levels are filled by holding local elections. Local elections are held every five years in Nepal’s 75 districts to elect representatives to District Development Committees, Municipalities, and Village Development Committees. The offices of chairman, vice chairman and ward members of the Village Development Committees, and Mayor, Deputy Mayor, and ward members of the Municipalities are directly elected during local elections. These elected members then choose the chairman and vice chairman of the concerned District Development Committee.

15. What is the significance of an election?
Elections are the foundation of democracy. Elections are required so people's representatives can be selected. In the absence of mandatory periodic elections, representatives of the people in the government could behave irresponsibly towards the people. The election provides people the opportunity to evaluate what the government has done in the past for the people. People are the masters of the government.

16. What do we mean by free and fair elections?
Free and fair elections are the soul of democracy. It is essential for elections to be free and fair if the true will of the people is to be known. For elections to be free and fair, voters must have an opportunity to vote in a secure environment without fear, threat, or temptation. Even the counting of votes in the election should be performed in a secure and impartial manner. The very essence and true meaning of free and fair elections is to ensure the election of the person truly trusted by the people.

17. How do we determine whether the elections were free and fair?
It is essential to evaluate the answers to the following questions in order to determine if an election was free and fair:
a. Were election laws just and applied equally to all political parties and candidates?
b. Were all qualified citizens given the same opportunity to register their names in the voters' list?
c. Did all political parties and candidates campaign for election freely and without fear?
d. Did all political parties get an equal opportunity to campaign through government media?
e. Were any efforts made to get any party or candidate elected by abusing government resources?
f. Was an opportunity made available to all voters to go to the polling station freely and to cast a secret ballot?
g. Were all voters able to receive information about all the candidates? Were they informed about the voting process?
h. Was the voting process transparent? Were national and international observation teams given an opportunity to observe the casting and counting of votes?

18. Why are free and fair elections necessary?
In a democracy, free and fair elections are necessary to select candidates trusted by the people. In the absence of fair elections, the selection of a true representative of the people is not possible. If people are stopped from free voting out of fear, threat, and force, and a party is elected through coercion, the formation of a government responsible to the people is not possible. Any candidate winning an election by illegal practices will not faithfully serve the will and aspirations of the people.

19. How can you help in holding free and fair elections?
Every citizen can play an important role in the task of holding free and fair elections. Citizens can help in the following ways:
a. By standing in a line at the polling station on Election Day.
b. By casting votes in the polling station without force and disturbance.
c. By informing the concerned staff when somebody comes to vote by impersonation.
d. By informing the election officer and the security personnel about a possible conspiracy designed to disturb the voting.
e. By offering whatever possible help to the election observation team.
f. By offering necessary help to the polling officer and security staff assigned to the election.
g. By resisting those trying to influence voting by force or with money.

20. What role can civil society play in holding free and fair elections?
The responsibility of holding free and fair elections is not only the task of the Election Commission or of His Majesty's Government and other related bodies. It is also the responsibility of civil society to contribute to the success of holding free and fair elections. Civil society members can play the following role in ensuring free and fair elections:
a. Offer necessary help to election personnel. Responsible members of civil society can help in such tasks as voter registration, voting and vote counting, without taking the side of any party or candidate.
b. Encourage the entire voting community to participate in the voting process. While playing such a role, leaders of civil society should give advice and suggestions impartially.
c. Form support committees in every polling station in order to help election personnel conduct elections in a fair and free manner.
d. Inform concerned officials immediately about rigging or irregularities observed during the election.
e. Work to prevent disturbances. It is everybody's duty to vote. It is the responsibility not only of election personnel but also of the public to create an environment where individuals can exercise their voting rights without fear.

21. What role should the media play in holding free and fair elections?
Radio, television, and newspapers are the media of mass communication. These media play an important role in elections. The roles of the mass media in the context of elections are as follows:
a. To inform voters about the election schedule and polling sites.
b. To report impartially the issues raised by the candidates.
c. To provide political parties an equal opportunity to present their views.
d. To provide election information to all classes, including indigenous people, and to communicate in different languages if necessary.
