Chapter 10: Security

71. What security systems exist to protect fair elections?
A security system is an entire set of activities designed to protect a voter’s rights, such as participation in free and fair voting, and voting without fear, intimidation, threat or pressure from any side.

72. What are the fundamental responsibilities of the bodies and units in charge of security?
It is the responsibility of the concerned security units to ensure that no untoward incident affecting peace and order during the period of election occurs, to maintain an environment where voting without hindrance is possible, and to protect the polling station, the voters, the ballot boxes, the officers and election personnel, and the place designated for vote counting.

73. What types of situations constitute a disturbance of the peace?
On Election Day, three hours before voting begins and up to its end, any activity intended to disturb or which disturbs the duties of election personnel, or any activity around the public house, building or land designated for polling, or around the private house, building, or land designated for polling, or in the vicinity surrounding the site designated for polling, is considered to be disturbing the peace.
The following activities may be considered to be disturbing the peace:
a. Use of loudspeaker/megaphone or any such instrument.
b. To play or make others play musical instruments, conduct a dance program, or conduct any type of gathering or ceremony which involves noise or crowds.
c. To explode or use weapons or poisonous gases, or carry explosives in the vote counting places or surrounding areas (security personnel exempted).

74. What role should political parties play to ensure a secure voting process?
Candidates, political parties, and political workers are highly involved in elections. Without their commitment to conduct elections peacefully, it is impossible for the voters to participate in a secure manner. Therefore, each political party must play the following role in secure voting:
a. Nominating upright and capable candidates.
b. Appointing a voting representative who is knowledgeable about election law and familiar with the voters.
c. Discouraging party workers from creating disturbances and restricting them from casting fake votes or engaging in violent activities.
d. Punishing people involved in election crime instead of protecting them.
e. Not influencing the police administration unlawfully.

75. What kind of cooperation must the people extend to make the voting system secure?
One can help in the following ways:
a. By standing in line at the polling station on Election Day.
b. By not destroying the ballot.
c. By informing the security officer when somebody tries to vote by impersonation.
d. By informing the security officer if someone is carrying weapons at the polling station.
e. By restricting/banning the sale and use of alcohol near the polling station.
f. By informing security personnel about suspected violence, especially in areas near international borders.

76. How can a candidate help ensure secure voting?
A candidate can help in the following ways:
a. By assisting administrative and security forces.
b. By instructing one's workers to vote peacefully.
c. By discouraging undue discussions or quarrels with opposition candidates and their supporters.
d. By not providing food or alcoholic drinks or other intoxicating substances during the polling period.
