Chapter 11: Election Code of Conduct

77. What is meant by an election code of conduct? Why is such a code required for elections?
An election code of conduct is a code to be followed by political parties, candidates, and the government in respect to an election. In other words, it is a set of binding legal regulations for political parties, candidates, and the government. Adherence to a code of conduct is required for the following reasons:
a. To conduct elections peacefully.
b. To discourage the use of government facilities and resources in favor of any side.
c. To discourage improper competition.
d. To make elections less expensive and free from pomp and show.
e. To make elections fair, free and dignified.

78. What conduct is required of political parties and candidates?
Political parties and candidates should adhere to the following:
a. Nothing detrimental to the nationality, independence, sovereignty, multiparty democracy, parliamentary system, or constitutional monarchy of Nepal should be propagated or published during the election period.
b. Voters should not be encouraged to vote on the grounds of religion, caste, ethnicity, or language.
c. No one is entitled to assassinate the character of any candidate or their family member, or publish such things.
d. Candidates should be aware of each other's democratic rights. As such, campaign language should be restrained and should conform to accepted norms of decency.
e. No one is allowed to campaign or conduct rallies 48 hours prior to the election.
f. No poster, pamphlet, document, or painting should be pasted or painted upon any religious places, anthropological or historical sites, or on memorials.
g. No poster, pamphlet, document, or painting should be pasted on private residences without consent of the owner.
h. No political party or candidate should usurp, snatch, destroy, or damage another’s poster or write anything on them.
i. Political parties or candidates should remove the posters, pamphlets, or election symbols after the election is over.
j. No one should damage, remove, amend or make any additions to election related material or notices issued by the Election Commission.
k. Publicity using any kind of banner or cloth is not allowed.
l. During the campaign, one is allowed to use only pamphlets up to 6" x 10" or posters up to 18' x 22" on paper of up to 60 gram weight. The poster must be of one color (i.e. black and white). The name and address of the printing press must be printed on all pamphlets and posters.
m. No one is allowed to use plastic materials during canvassing.
n. No candidate shall use more than three vehicles in his constituency including buses, trucks, cars, or tractors. Likewise, one cannot use more than three loudspeakers.
o. The public peace should not be disturbed while using audio materials like loudspeakers, cassettes or radios. Additionally, one can use such materials only between 7 am and 9 pm. One should not play such audio instruments in one place for a long period with the exception of some public meetings.
p. The time allotted for having public meetings, street corner gatherings, or rallies is between 7 am and 9 pm. Demonstrations that use arms or torches are not allowed.
q. Political parties having rallies or public meetings must contact and inform the concerned local administration.
r. Since it is the duty of all to assist and co-operate with the election officers and security guards in the successful discharge of their duties, people must refrain from the use of fear, threat, intimidation, force or temptation.
s. No one should compel voters to vote by using fear, threat, intimidation, or temptation, or by a religious oath.
t. No one should try to write anything or compel others to write or paint around the polling station. A candidate must remove such materials before polling.
u. One should not obstruct or attempt to obstruct a voter from voting.
v. A candidate or his assigned representative, or a party worker, should not use force, coercion, or intimidation, nor seize or attempt to seize the ballot box, or seize or attempt to seize, snatch or damage the ballots or other election related materials.
w. No political party member or candidate, while registering his/her nomination, is allowed to enter into areas designated by the election officer with a procession.
x. One should not conduct rallies of trucks, tractors, buses, rickshaws, cars, or motorcycles (bicycles are allowed).
y. No candidate shall use more than one vehicle on Election Day.

79. What conduct is expected from government owned mass media?
Government owned mass media should adhere to the following:
a. The mass communication media (audio, visual and print) functioning under the control of His Majesty's Government shall be completely impartial and shall have no prejudice against any of the political parties or candidates.
b. The opportunity to present candidates and their respective policies and view points to the voters should be made available by the mass media. The arrangements for media time must be based on clear and just standards.
c. Attractive audio visual and print material encouraging voters to cast their votes without fear shall be published and broadcast to the maximum extent possible.
d. No publicity aimed at influencing voters on the basis of religion, community, or caste is allowed.
e. No materials to arouse the feeling of illusion, jealousy, terror, excitement, or violence are to published or produced, or to be encouraged to be published.
f. While collecting the news, editing, giving titles, publishing photos or cartoons, writing editorials, reactions, reports, descriptions, discussions, analyses, questions, answers or any type of audio, visual or print materials, publicity shall not be aimed at influencing the voters in favor of a particular political party or candidate.
g. During multiparty events, a program moderator must play an impartial role.
h. Government media shall keep cassettes or duplicates of materials mentioned they produce or publish, and submit them to the Election Commission if requested.

80. What conduct is expected from His Majesty's Government?
His Majesty's Government should adhere to the following:
a. Foundation laying ceremonies, inaugurations, or the approval of any new plan or program, or the announcement of a study or survey of any new program, or the provision of grants should be avoided.
b. His Majesty’s Government officers and civil servants, and employees of government owned organizations or corporations/committees, may not be used for the purpose of publicly favoring a political party or a candidate in order to influence election results.
c. Any political party or candidate should not utilize for the sake of publicity or for benefit, vehicles and other resources or property belonging to governmental organizations, public corporations, or committees.
d. Buildings, guesthouses, playgrounds, assembly halls and other such resources or facilities should not be given to any political party or candidate or to persons involved in elections. Vehicles and other resources or facilities used by the ministers or advisors of His Majesty's Government should not be utilized for the benefit of any particular party or candidate. However, in view of the dignity of the office of Prime Minister, these restrictions do not apply to the use of government resources or facilities in connection with a Prime Minister’s visit, but political party leaders and cadres shall not be included in this exception.
e. No transfers, deputizations, or appointments to any vacancy should be made without the permission of the Election Commission after the election date has been announced.
f. Creation of new positions, salary increases and the granting of grades, prizes or other such facilities is prohibited.
g. Selling, distribution and consumption of alcohol is prohibited three days prior to the election and three days after the election.

81. How do we determine whether or not the code of conduct has been adhered to during the election?
The following have been established in order to determine whether or not the code of conduct for elections has been followed:
a. The code of conduct comes into effect the moment the date for election is announced.
b. Prior to the formal opening of the election office, the Election Commission mobilizes local administration and police to monitor and follow up on whether or not the code of conduct is being followed.
c. After the opening of the election office, one officer is assigned to the task of monitoring and following up on whether or not the code of conduct is being followed.
d. When the Election Commission is informed by any source about a violation of the code of conduct, such information is immediately examined.
e. Violations are immediately stopped through the cooperation of local administration and police. It is also the duty of the administration as well as the police to do this.
f. The local administration or the police should immediately inform the Election Commission if a violation of the code of conduct is seen or found.
g. The election officer shall report immediately to the Election Commission about such acts.
h. The election code of conduct is enforced only in those constituencies where an election is being conducted.

82. How is a complaint lodged to allege a violation of the code of conduct? Who acts upon the complaint?
a. After the announcement of the election but prior to the opening of the election office, anyone can file a petition either orally or in writing to the local police administration.
b. One can file a petition orally or in written form to the office of the election officer after it opens.
c. After receiving information on a violation of the code of conduct, the offices shall follow up by contacting the political party or candidate involved.
d. The election officer, the local administration, or the police, after receiving information on a violation of the code of conduct by a political party or a candidate, shall take action and inform the Election Commission.
e. The Election Commission shall conduct the proceedings if His Majesty’s Government is alleged to have violated the code of conduct.

83. What types of activities and campaign expenditures are political parties allowed, according to the code of conduct?
The nature of activities and the spending limits of a political party or candidate, according to the code of conduct, are as follows:

A. The House of Representatives
The election code of conduct provides for different spending limits. Nepal’s 75 districts are divided into different groups due to their various geographic and economic conditions.

a. Districts in Group A:
Kathmandu, Lalitpur and Bhaktapur - 3 districts

b. Districts in Group B:
Jhapa, Morang, Sunsari, Saptari, Siraha, Dhanusha, Mahottari, Sarlahi, Rauthat, Bara, Parsa, Chitwan, Nawalparasi, Rupendehi, Kapilwastu, Dang, Surkhet, Banke, Bardia, Kailali and Kanchanpur – 21 districts

c. Districts in Group C:
Taplejung, Panchthar, Ilam, Sankhuwasabha, Terthum, Bhojpur, Dhankuta, Solukhumbu, Khotang, Okhaldhunga, Udayapur, Dolakha, Ramechap, Sindhuli, Dhading, Nuwakot, Rasuwa, Kabhre, Sindhupalchok, Makwanpur, Gorakha, Lamjung, Kaski, Palpa, Arghakkhanchi, Maygdi, Baglung, Parwat, Gulmi, Rukum, Rolpa, Pyuthan, Salyan, Jajarkot, Dailekh, Bajura, Acham, Bajhang, Dotti, Darchula, Baitadi, Dadeldhura, Tanahu and Syangja - 44 districts

d. Districts in Group D:
Manang, Mustang, Dolpa, Mugu, Jumala, Kalikot and Humla - 7 districts.

The following are the spending limits set by the Election Code of Conduct for the four groups:
| Item No. | Title | Group A | Group B | Group C | Group D |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | To purchase voters list | 1,500 | 1,500 | 1,500 | 1,500 |
| 2 | Transportation | 162,000 | 145,500 | 87,500 | 61,500 |
| 3 | Loudspeaker | 21,000 | 18,000 | 15,000 | 11,000 |
| 4 | Poster (Max.10,000) | 11,000 | 8,000 | 6,500 | 3,500 |
| 5 | Pamphlets (Max 10,000) | 4,500 | 4,000 | 3,500 | 2,500 |
| 6 | Loading | - | - | 10,000 | 12,000 |
| 7 | Public meeting/Seminar | 25,000 | 20,000 | 15,000 | 10,000 |
| 8 | Party workers/office | 20,000 | 15,000 | 10,000 | 5,000 |
| 9 | Booth expenditure | 20,000 | 15,000 | 10,000 | 5,000 |
| 10 | Miscellaneous expenses | 10,000 | 8,000 | 6,000 | 3,000 |
| | Total Expenses | 275,000 | 235,000 | 165,000 | 115,000 |

Notes:
- D group transport limits include expenditures only for horses.
- C group transport limits include an additional Rs. 25,000 for other transportation in addition to horses.

The following are rates set by the election code of conduct:

1. Vehicles (jeep, car, bus, truck or tractor): minimum daily rates for each unit varies depending on location (deducting fuel and maintenance):
   a. If rented:
      * Petrol vehicles Rs. 750
      * Diesel vehicles Rs. 1275
   b. Amount deducted from above rate if not rented:
      * Petrol Vehicles Rs. 500
      * Diesel Vehicles Rs. 1000

2. Other vehicles (deducting the cost of fuel and repair):
   a. Motorcycle
      * If rented Rs. 200
      * Amount deducted if not rented: Rs. 150
   b. Auto rickshaw
      * If rented Rs. 350
      * Amount deducted if not rented Rs. 250
   c. Rickshaw
      * If rented Rs.150
      * Amount deducted if not rented Rs. 100
   d. Horse (not including food)
      * If rented Rs. 625
      * Amount deducted if not rented Rs. 550

3. Loudspeaker
   * If rented Rs. 225
   * Amount deducted if not rented Rs. 125

4. Hand Speaker/Megaphone
   * If rented Rs. 75
   * Amount deducted if not rented Rs. 50

84. How should political parties or candidates submit the record of expenditures made in an election according to the code of conduct?
The following are the regulations regarding time and place for a political party or a candidate to submit a record of election expenditures according to the code of conduct:
a. A candidate of a political party or an independent candidate shall spend the money himself, or by representatives, and not exceed the amount set by the Election Commission, only for activities allowed by the election code of conduct.
b. The candidate shall keep all records of expenses.
c. A political party shall submit a complete description of total expenditures spent on its candidate to the Election Commission.
d. In an election for the House of Representatives, a candidate shall submit to the election office a complete description of expenditures for every 15-day period within three days after that spending period’s completion.
e. In the House of Representatives election, a candidate or political party shall submit a record of total election expenditures, and expenditures made in support of the party or candidate by third parties, within 30 days after the declaration of election results, in a format prescribed by the election officer.
f. The election officer shall audit records of election expenditures and after the audit shall send them to the Election Commission.
g. In local elections, each candidate must submit to the election officer a record of total election expenditures incurred during the election, within 30 days after the declaration of election results.

85. What are the provisions under existing law for a candidate who does not submit the details of expenditures within the stipulated time, or exceeds the limit of expenses to be spent on the elections?
The following are provisions under law for a person who does not submit the details of expenditures within the stipulated time or exceeds the limit of the maximum allowed expenses to be spent on the election:
a. In case of a violation of the election code of conduct by any candidate or by a political party or its workers while engaged in an election campaign, the election court shall void the election pursuant to section 19, subsection (1) of the Election Crime and Punishment Act 1990.
b. In the event of failure to submit the description of election expenses, the Election Commission may impose a fine of up to an amount equal to the ceiling specified for election expenses.
c. If a candidate engages in egregious conduct which damages the election process or spends massive amounts above the legal limits, the Election Commission may decide to disqualify such person from being a candidate in any election for up to six years effective immediately.
d. If it is proved that a candidate exceeded the spending limit specified in the election code of conduct, s/he shall be punished according to the Election Crime and Punishment Act 1990, and his/her election shall be void.

Government owned committees, government authorities, and employees of His Majesty's Government shall strictly abide by the election code of conduct. The Election Commission, or any official authorized according to the Election Commission Act 1990, may request action against such an employee or impose punishment in accordance with law for violating the election code of conduct. Where violations of the code of conduct are involved, punishment may also be invoked under the Election Crime and Punishment Act 1990, if the Act defines the action as an offense.
