Chapter 6: Candidates

42. What are the requirements to be a candidate for the House of Representatives?
Persons who meet the following qualifications can be candidates in an election for the House of Representatives:
a) Nepali citizen.
b) Twenty-five years old or older.
c) Not mentally disturbed or insane.
d) Has not been declared insolvent or bankrupt.
e) Not holding a paid position in His Majesty's Government.
f) Not convicted of an election offense.
g) If someone is convicted of a criminal offense involving moral turpitude and sentenced to more than two years imprisonment, six years must have elapsed since the date of completion of the sentence.
h) Whose name is registered in the voters' list.
i) Capable under prevailing law.

43. What are the requirements to be a candidate in the local elections?
Persons who meet the following qualifications can be candidates in local elections:
a) Nepali citizen.
b) Twenty-one years old or older.
c) Name registered in the voter’s list of the Village Development Committee or Municipality or Ward Committee in which the candidate seeks office.
d) Not mentally disturbed.
e) Not holding a paid position in His Majesty's Government.

44. What steps must be taken to become a candidate for the House of Representatives?
To be a candidate for the House of Representatives, one must take certain steps. The candidate is nominated and proposed by a voter and supported by other voters of the same constituency. The proposer, the seconder, as well as the nominated candidate must sign their names on a nomination form. The proposed candidate must also formally consent to candidacy on the nomination form. The candidate, the proposer of the candidate or the candidate’s assigned representative shall register the nomination papers, attached with a bank voucher of 3000 rupees as a deposit. The voucher must be made out to the Election Office of the respective district and submitted on the specified date during the specified hours.

45. What is the process required to be a candidate from a political party for the House of Representatives?
Any political party registered with the Election Commission must attach a formal letter nominating their candidate when submitting the nomination form. It is necessary for any political party or its assigned authority to follow the format set by the Election Commission while producing such formal letters.

46. What is required to be a candidate in the election for local government bodies?
To be a candidate in the election for local bodies, the person's name must be proposed and nominated by a voter and supported by other voters of the same constituency. The signatures of both the proposer and seconder, along with the consent and signature of the nominated candidate, must appear on the nomination form. The candidate, the proposer of the candidate, or the candidate’s assigned representative shall register the nomination papers, attached with a bank voucher as a deposit. The voucher must be made out to the Election Office of the respective district and submitted on the specified date during the specified hours.

47. What is the process required to be a candidate from a political party in an election for local bodies?
Any political organization or party recognized by the Election Commission shall attach a formal letter nominating candidates for the local election while submitting the nomination form. The authorized person of a political party must follow the format set by the Election Commission while producing such formal letters.

48. What amount of money must be deposited in order to run for election to local bodies?
A candidate in local elections must deposit the following amounts of money to run for the following offices:
a) Ward Chairman or Member of Village Development Committee: Rs. 50
b) Chairman, Vice Chairman of Village Development Committee: Rs. 100
c) Ward Member of municipality: Rs. 200
d) Mayor or Deputy Mayor of municipality: Rs. 500
e) Area Member of District Development Committee: Rs. 500
f) Chairman or Vice Chairman of District Development Committee: Rs. 1000

49. Who are election representatives, voting representatives, and counting representatives (agents)?
An election representative is a person appointed by the candidate to perform election activities. The candidate must give written notice thereof to the election officer.
A voting representative is a person appointed either by the candidate or by his/her election representative to perform activities on Election Day. The candidate must given written notice thereof to the polling officer.
A counting representative is a person appointed either by the candidate or by his/her election representative to represent the candidate at the place for counting of votes. The candidate must give written notice to the election officer.

50. What happens in the absence of a candidate, candidate’s representatives or their failure to sign a document?
The performance of election activities, including voting or counting of votes, shall not be adjourned merely because election representatives, voting representatives, or counting representatives are absent, or because any of them fails to perform such functions or fails to sign a document.
