Chapter 4: Voters and Voting Rights

22. Why should you vote?
In a democratic system, people are the source of state power. Voting is the means by which citizens fulfill their civic duty and participate actively in the development and welfare of the country. Voting is necessary in order to choose political leadership to form a government. By electing representatives, citizens indirectly influence law, policy and decision-making and oppose bad activities of the government.
Voting is important for the following reasons:
• Citizens participate in the governance of their country by voting.
• Voting is not only our right but also our duty.
• By voting, we are in a position to select our representatives.
• By voting, we can defeat a candidate we dislike.
• Election results shall be a true representation of the will of the people only when all people participate in voting.
• Only through elections will we be able to make the government responsive to us.

23. Who is qualified to be enrolled in the voters' list?
The following persons are entitled to be registered as voters:
• Nepali citizens having a permanent residence in a ward;
• Eighteen years old or older;
• Not mentally disturbed; and
• If someone is sentenced to serve one or more years in prison for any criminal offense, one year must have passed since his or her release from prison.

24. How can one secure his/her voting rights?
In Nepal’s parliamentary system of government, an election is based on multiparty democracy and adult franchise. Every Nepali eighteen years or older is entitled to vote according to the constitution. However, it is compulsory for every voter to register his or her name in the voters' registration list of the concerned election constituency and to have permanent residence in order to exercise voting rights. An identity card is also required in an election constituency where identity cards are mandatory.

25. How does a voter begin the task of registering in the voters' list?
The task of registering in the voters' list is done at the Deputy Officer’s Voter Registration Office in Village Development Committees or municipalities. A voter may only begin the task of registration during the month of Baishak (April-May).

26. What process must a voter follow while registering in the voters' list?
A person 18 years of age by the end of the month of Chaitra (March-April), a person who has changed their permanent residence for any reason including marriage, or a person who discovers their name missing from the voter list for any reason, is required to submit a written form with supporting documents to the Deputy Officer’s Voter Registration Office.

27. What is a voter required to do if his/her name is absent from the voters' list?
A person otherwise entitled to be registered as a voter whose name has been dropped for some reason, is required to file a petition form by the fifteenth day of the month of Asad (June-July) and submit it to the Deputy Officer’s Voter Registration Office.

28. How to file an application to correct such details as name, date of birth, or age in the voters' list?
A person entitled to be registered as a voter who has had a name change, or who notes any mistake in name, date of birth, age or other description, is required to file a petition form by the fifteenth day of the month of Asad (June-July) and submit it to the Deputy Officer’s Voter Registration Office.

29. How to amend a duplication of a voter’s name in the voter’s list? What is the punishment for a person deliberately duplicating a name on the voter’s list?
A person can only have his/her name in one voters list in one constituency. If duplication is found, the voter must inform the Deputy Officer in writing. If the voter fails to inform, and the Election Commission, the Chief Officer of Voter Registration, or the Deputy Officer becomes aware of the duplication, the Deputy Officer must cancel the voter’s name from other lists, keeping only one name of the voter in the list where the voter permanently resides. Any voter who deliberately files a petition to duplicate his/her name on a voters list shall be punished with a fine of 2000 rupees, or with imprisonment for one month, or both. Therefore, a voter must be careful not to register more than once.

30. How does a voter know whether his or her name is included in the final voters’ list?
A voter can check whether or not his/her name is included in the voters' list by contacting the Deputy Officer before the list is submitted to the Chief Officer of Voter Registration. If the voter does not see his/her name in the list, the voter can go to the Voter Registration Office before the last day of Shrawan (July-August) to register in the final voters’ list.

31. What is the significance of a voters' identity card?
The system of identity cards is intended to make voters aware of their voting rights and to discourage those who come to vote by impersonation. Voters are not allowed to vote without producing the voter’s identity card in places where an identity card is required. In those areas, a voter must present his or her identity card before voting.

32. What process must be completed in order to get a voters' identity card?
Voters must do the following to obtain a voters’ identity card:
a) His or her name must be included in the final voters list.
b) One has to have a photograph taken by the concerned team assigned to take photographs in one's constituency.
c) One has to obtain his or her identity card by contacting the team assigned to the distribution of identity cards.

33. What must be done if a voter fails to sit for a photograph for the voter’s identity card?
In case of a voter’s failure to get a photograph for the voters' identity card, one can obtain a photograph by going to the concerned teams assigned to updating the identity card.

34. What must a voter do after getting a voters' identity card?
One should take good care of his/her voter’s identity card. One should not alter, add another name, or cancel his or her identity card. One has to show his or her identity card to the concerned officer at the polling station when voting.

35. What is a voter required to do when a voters’ identity card is lost, torn or burned?
In the case of a lost, torn or burned identity card, one must file a petition with details to the Chief Identity Card Officer. One can obtain a duplicate identity card after an investigation, at a time specified by the Election Commission. To obtain a duplicate, one must pay fees as required.

36. What are the conditions under which an identity card will be canceled?
The Chief Identity Card Officer shall cancel an identity card on confirmation that the card was obtained in another person’s name.

37. What are the rights and privileges of a voter?
The following are the rights and privileges of a voter:
a. Voters have the right to cast a secret ballot.
b. Voters have the right to vote freely and without fear in favor of a candidate of the voter’s choice.
c. Voters have the right to lodge a complaint against a voter attempting to vote by impersonation.
d. Voters have a right to vote freely and in a peaceful environment.
e. Voters have the right to be informed about the policies and programs of the candidates.

38. What are the duties a voter must fulfill?
It is the duty of a voter to abide by the legal and the moral obligations of a voter and good citizen. It is possible to hold impartial elections only when voters perform their duties honestly. Ordinarily, voters have to perform the following duties:
• Identify an able candidate.
• Vote in favor of the able candidate of their choice by participating in the elections.
• Cast a vote free from intimidation, fear, threat, temptation, or undue favor.
• To not compel another voter to cast a vote in favor of any candidate against his or her will.
• To inform the police administration, election office or polling station personnel of an attempt by any political party, worker, candidate, or voter to commit an act in violation of the election act or election code of conduct.
• To help individuals who are not able to understand any matter concerning the election
• To cooperate in holding fair, impartial, and peaceful elections.
