Chapter 9: Counting of Votes

66. What are the requirements for impartial vote counting?
The following are the requirements for impartial vote counting:
a. Fix a certain place to count votes and make necessary security arrangements.
b. Arrange for counting of votes in one particular place or in one particular room.
c. Arrangements must be made not to give entry to any person with weapons except the security guard.
d. The election officer shall publish a notice specifying the place, date, and time of the vote counting.
e. The place of vote counting must not be crowded; arrangements should be made to give entry to only two representatives of each candidate.
f. During vote counting, seating arrangements must be made for the vote counters and the candidates or his/her representatives. The candidate and his/her representatives can watch vote counting but cannot touch the ballots or assist in the counting.
g. Before the counting of votes, signatures of all parties involved with vote counting are required. Such agreement is made in accordance with prevailing acts, laws and directives.
h. After obtaining the ballot boxes from the various polling stations of the concerned election constituencies, arrangements should be made for immediate vote counting.
i. After obtaining the affidavits or signatures of the parties involved, vote counting is started.
j. After preparing the documents, the person assigned to vote counting by the party’s candidate shall inspect the number of ballot boxes, the state of the boxes (have they been changed or opened?), the name of the polling station, and the other matters related to vote counting.

67. What is the process for vote counting?
The process for counting votes is as follows:
a. After documenting the number of ballot boxes which arrived from their respective stations, the lid of the ballot box is opened and all the ballots in the ballot boxes are emptied on to the counting table. The empty ballot box is shown to the candidate or his assigned election representative or voting representative. While pouring the ballots from the boxes, the votes from two polling stations must be mixed up (in elections for the House of Representatives). The votes received from two wards of the same village development committee or the votes from other polling stations of other village development committee should be mixed up together.
b. The ballots should be opened and the side with the election symbol must be placed upside. Bundles of at least 50 or 100 votes must be tied with a string and set in piles.
c. The votes must be separated according to their election symbols. The void or rejected votes should be kept aside. These also should be made into bundles of 50 or 100 votes and tied up with strings or rubber bands.
d. If there is more than one race on a single ballot, all the ballots must be opened and bundled into piles of 50 or 100 and tied with string or rubber bands. Then the ballots must be taken out of each bundle and the votes for each race must be counted at the same time.
e. The process of counting votes must continue without break.
f. When counting is completed for each post, separate vote counting forms must be filled out. The number of votes for each candidate must be recorded. In this way, the process of counting of votes is done and completed and the result of vote counting is published.

68. What are the conditions under which a ballot is declared invalid?
A ballot is declared invalid on the following grounds:
a. If it does not bear the signature of the concerned polling officer.
b. If it does not have the marking designated for voting (“swastik”), or if bears any other sign.
c. If the marks on the ballot are torn, blurred, defaced, or dirty.
d. If a voter has marked in a place other than in the box containing the symbol of the candidate.
e. If the ballot is marked in a place where there is no one contesting.
f. If it is returned to the polling officer with the intention of abstaining from voting.
g. If the mark does not clearly signify definitely to which candidate the mark has been given.
h. If the mark is placed in more than one box.
i. If the vote is cast on a ballot other than the ballot specified for the concerned polling station.
j. If there are such things as money or extra papers attached to the ballot, or if the ballot is torn or has a hole in it.
k. If the receipt is still attached to the ballot.
l. If a half mark (containing the symbol of 'swastik') is made on one side of the ballot and a full mark on the other side of the ballot.
m. If it is a fake ballot.

69. What is a candidate entitled to do when s/he is not satisfied with vote counting?
If the candidate is not satisfied with the counting of votes, after the vote counting is over and before the result of election is declared, s/he can file a petition to the chief election officer to repeat the counting of some or all ballots. The candidate should submit such petition as soon as possible.

70. What are the obligations of a candidate during vote counting?
S/he must adhere to the following duties:
a. Be present during the counting of votes.
b. Assist in creating a peaceful environment in the polling station.
c. Not create unnecessary debate and assist in preventing it.
d. Accept the lawful decision of the chief election officer.
e. Abide by agreements made by all parties.
f. Sign the affidavit or documents at the beginning and at the end of vote counting.
g. Accept the mandate of the public, even if defeated.
